The idea of racial capitalism is that the advancement of a capitalist society and the accumulation of capital are innately racially biased, and in practice widen the inequality gap between privileged and underprivileged members of the population.
This can be seen manifested throughout history, as everything from drug laws to traffic fines utilized racial bias and corrupt justifications to commodify a disenfranchised portion of their populations to maximize profit at the dominated group's expense.
The system of capitalism itself only serves to further embed these inequities and disparities by giving immense power to the capitalist and feeding a vicious cycle that makes it nearly impossible to escape or achieve autonomy as a member of a disenfranchised group.
The role of psychology throughout history has largely been to justify many of these inequities and human right violations by providing often corrupt reasoning and science to propagate racist ideologies and systems.
Thus psychology has largely served the interests of those in power, and tried (with good or bad intentions) to force those without power to fit into these systems.
"History from Below" and Liberation Psychology aim to reverse this narrative, focusing instead on the needs of the oppressed and powerless in society, through the revision of historical accounts from the perspective of the common person rather than the elite, and the realignment of psychology towards the collective good.
Furthermore, psychology has taken on a focus in understanding this inequality, which may allow for action in the future to mitigate it and use psychology for good.
Racial Capitalism is fundamentally intertwined into almost every aspect of everyday life.
The capitalization of the prison system, for example, has taken advantage of an oppressed population for profit and has had a disproportionately negative effect on the African American population.
A loophole to the thirteenth amendment allows for involuntary and unpaid labor as punishment for crimes, which prisons and businesses have been using for decades to gain access to cheap labor at the expense of prisoners (lecture 11/13TH).
This stemmed from the abolition of slavery and the sudden loss of a major labor supply in the southern economy, leading the south to scramble to find a new way to fulfill their massive demand.
African Americans, many of whom were just freed, were arrested en masse and imprisoned, where they once again were caught in slavery, this time simply under a different name.
This was followed by the Nixon era of "Law and Order" in the United States, and Reagan's "war on drugs'', all of which disproportionately affected African Americans.
The lack of logic and science behind the much harsher sentencing for crack cocaine (which was used by more African Americans) compared to powder cocaine (mostly used by the wealthy) is just one example of how the state upheld and even instigated a racialized capitalism and encoded it into law (13TH/lecture 11).
Another example of this is the capitalization of the police force and law, a prime example being the municipality system in St. Louis, MO.
This system issued massive fines in poor communities for incredibly minor offenses (such as jaywalking), and allowed for you to get fines from multiple different municipalities for the same offense, maximizing profit and effectively crippling the poor population, many of whom cannot afford to pay such inordinate fines and are then further penalized in a vicious cycle (lecture 12/Ferguson: A Report from Occupied Territory).
This is another example of how the state reinforces unfair and unequal practices and systems that widen inequality and make it even more difficult for the oppressed to escape the system.
Further examples include the inequality of healthcare and insurance, with differing access and costs, who's believed when they say they're in pain, and who's taken seriously by doctors, and housing inequality (restrictive covenants and racist zoning laws) (lecture 17).
These examples all reveal the sinister and often subtle manifestation of racial capitalism in the lived realities of individuals, and how the state often reinforces these systems and upholds inequality through their policies and actions.
While psychology and History have often favored the side of the oppressors and those in power, new movements have focused on reversing this narrative and empowering the common people and the oppressed.
"History from Below" is a movement that focuses on looking at historical events and narratives from the perspective of the oppressed populations and taking emphasis off of the false idea that just a few powerful figures in history accounted for the majority of happenings (Rediker).
It is almost never one singular brilliant person that comes up with a new philosophy or achieves some great act; instead, they were simply the culmination of many other people and ideas before them that are then represented by these singular figures of power in traditional historical narratives.
History from Below attempts to emphasize the individual experience of common people, of the wage laborers, the common soldiers, and the anarchists, and show how they were oppressed and subdued by those in power.
It takes away the biased and often false narrative set by those who benefitted from history and focuses instead on the truth of the general masses, those who had little power but bear the most weight of history and its aftermath (Rediker).
This allows for the true extent of inequality to be seen and understood, and only when this happens can it be addressed.
Liberation psychology attempts to do a similar thing, but instead of focusing on history it focuses on reversing psychology's historical role in upholding and justifying the systems of the oppressors, into a role of helping those in need and advancing the social conditions of the disenfranchised (martin baro).
Liberation psychology attempts to understand the perspectives of the communities it serves and help individuals achieve freedom and autonomy.
Instead of trying to pathologize and cure "problems'' within the individual in order to help them fit better into an unyielding system, it tries to figure out how the system can be manipulated in order to better serve the people within it (Martin Baro).
This is an incredibly important shift in perspective that takes power and importance away from those in positions of privilege and validates the oppressed, which in the long run has the effect of exposing and minimizing social inequality in communities.
With this shift in the focus of psychology comes many new methods that help us understand inequality.
Jetten and Peters focus on subjective experience and more subtle forms of inequality, especially in education, to show how deeply entrenched social inequalities can have an adverse effect on students in universities and the education system, despite there being no obvious inequality in their education.
This is because many of the aspects of our education system were created for a specific group, and even when other groups (here she focuses on lower income and minority students) get the same opportunities and education, it often doesn't serve them nearly as well as the education's intended recipient.
Croizet and others emphasize the role of the education system in perpetuating social inequality, and how it shapes the way individuals think, act, and perceive the world such that there doesn't even need to be a conscious effort to subjugate others or submit to them; it just happens subconsciously (symbolic violence).
Many of these institutions categorize their members and funnel them into specific jobs or career paths that then restrict the paths their lives can take.
This categorization is a way of controlling individuals and providing the necessary skill and labor to perpetuate systems of inequality, as well as categorizing individuals so they become trapped in these specific roles (Croizet).
Furthermore, they argue that the educational system and the idea of an egalitarian 'meritocracy', is not actually egalitarian or merit-based at all.
Even if equal opportunity is provided to each student, it doesn't account for generational inequalities and disparities that place them at a disadvantage from the start.
On top of this, equal opportunity isn't really even possible, because by setting up any form of standardized measure of merit, one has to create an ideal or norm that will inevitably suit one population best (croizet).
Every other group trying to achieve this standard is working at a disadvantage because their language or culture or ideas are not valued the same.
Finally, Augoustinos and Callaghan discuss the implications of language and the social inequality it perpetuates in everyday life.
They discuss the role of language in justifying and legitimizing inequality and unequal practices through contradictory arguments and double-standards (Augoustinos and Callaghan).
These new psychological approaches help to understand the role of inequality in society and how the systems and norms in everyday life perpetuate it.
These studies serve to unveil some of the more subtle and sinister ways in which inequality is present in everyday life and is perpetuated by our systems, government, and education.
Inequality often hides behind the guise of egalitarianism or meritocracy, and unveiling the contradictory function of many of these systems helps reveal what we can change in order to achieve a more egalitarian system and help those who have been oppressed get back on equal footing with those inequality has benefitted.
By reversing the narrative and giving those without power a voice to reveal their condition and oppression, we can begin to undo the wrongs of the past and implement changes that will benefit everyone and society as a whole.
