The world can be a tough place.
Especially in an age where we hear about every bad thing happening at a moment’s notice, it’s easy to believe that people suck.
And a lot of the time, they do.
Every time I hear another news story about businesses screwing each other over or when I have to deal with the fallout of a nasty social situation, I think to myself, why can’t we just be good to one another?
But simply demanding a higher standard is the wrong way to get people to change.
It’s unrealistic to expect people to change just because they should be better.
Instead, there should be an alignment of incentives; The best way to get people to be consistently good is for it to be in their own best interests to be good.
That’s what I explore in this paper: is it in your own best interests to be a good person?
Or, in other words, does being a good person lead to a better life?
I define being a “good person”, an inherently very subjective ideal, based on the most common aspects I found while reviewing the literature: generosity, kindness, forgiveness and gratitude, ethical business practice, bullying, honesty, and aggression.
In this paper, I will try to show that being a “good person” in terms of these topics either directly leads to improved performance, or leads to improved life-satisfaction/happiness/wellbeing or an increased likeability by other people.
Then, based on research discussed in class, as well as research cited here, I will argue that greater social success (ie.
greater number of / better friends) and happiness/positive affect leads to improved overall performance in life.
Through this framework I attempt to argue that being a “good person” directly and indirectly leads to improved overall performance, and show that it is in a person’s own best interest to be good.
The first aspect to explore in being a “good person” is generosity.
Here I define generosity loosely as the willingness of a person to share/give more than expected or required in a prosocial way (ie.
monetary donations, social/emotional support, etc.).
Generosity is widely encouraged from a cultural perspective, but there is also an intrinsic motivation for giving baked into our evolution.
From as young as 1 year old, toddlers exhibit higher happiness levels when giving compared to receiving treats (Aknin, L. B., Hamlin, J. K., & Dunn, E. W. 2012).
Not only this, but the highest happiness levels actually came from costly giving (28% increase compared to non-costly giving), where toddlers had to forfeit their own treat in order to give (Aknin, L. B., Hamlin, J. K., & Dunn, E. W. 2012).
The benefits of being generous start early in life, and the greater the sacrifice, the greater the benefit of generosity on mood, self-esteem, and satisfaction levels.
This can be further demonstrated in adults, where it has been shown that prosocial spending enhances happiness (Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I.
Participants in one study reported a 20% increase in life satisfaction when spending 15% more of their income on others, and 25% higher happiness scores when spending $20 on others versus themselves (Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I.
Altruistic decisions like these activate the mesolimbic reward system, the same system activated when receiving monetary rewards (Moll, J., et al.
Specifically, activation levels in the ventral striatum in one study showed 32% higher levels during donations compared to receiving monetary rewards, and the anterior prefrontal cortex activation increased by 20% during decisions to make costly donations, emphasizing that the mental benefits shown in early childhood are preserved through adulthood (Moll, J., et al.
The impact of giving is so strong it has been shown to make you live longer.
A study by (Brown, S. L., Nesse, R. M., Vinokur, A. D., & Smith, D. M. (2003)) investigated the effects of providing versus receiving social support on mortality in older married adults, and found that providing support significantly reduced mortality.
Surprisingly, this study also found that once they controlled for giving support, receiving support had no significant impact on mortality (Brown, S. L., Nesse, R. M., Vinokur, A. D., & Smith, D. M. 2003).
On a broader scale, there seems to be intrinsic social motivation for generosity and prosocial tendencies.
Children with Williams Syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by lower cognitive abilities but high levels of sociability, overfriendliness, and empathy, have been shown to be more generous in modeled scenarios (Foti, F., Costanzo, F., et al.
In a modeled Dictator game, WS participants gave more than half their resources in 57% of trials, while typically developing participants gave only 23% (Foti, F., Costanzo, F., et al.
They were equally fair in rejecting disadvantageous inequity, but more generous when presented with advantageous equity, and were more prone to judge fairness with empathetic concern than logical fairness reasoning (Foti, F., Costanzo, F., et al.
Social motivation, therefore, without advanced social cognition, supports basic fairness and sharing behavior, which in turn contributes to cooperative success.
Furthermore, generosity in forms like indirect reciprocity support cooperation through reputation and trust, and emphasize the social utility of generosity.
According to one study, "Indirect reciprocity accounts for 50% of cooperative decisions in large groups with reputation systems."
(Nowak, M. A., & Sigmund, K. 2005).
Additionally, indirect reciprocity led to a persistence in cooperation across 85% of interactions in simulation models, and “reputation scores correlated strongly with willingness to cooperate (r = 0.89)” (Nowak, M. A., & Sigmund, K. 2005).
Furthermore, altruism is also associated with perceived trustworthiness (r = 0.82), which I will show later increases social success (Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U.
However, the study also discovered that "Altruistic acts directed toward high-reputation individuals occur[ed] 75% more frequently than toward low-reputation individuals."
This raises a concern for the selfish generosity framework I have proposed, as it demonstrates that selfish generosity may not benefit those in society who need it the most, and might only contribute to the wealth inequality and unethical practices that exist in the world today.
However, while this may emphasize the fact that giving to people who can help you the most now may be a better selfish strategy in the short term, I argue that giving to those in need goes significantly further than giving to those who already have much, and that reciprocity will be much greater from those in need when they are more fortunate than those for whom your generosity meant less.
Other qualities I have valued in my definition of being a “good person” are kindness, which I define as being considerate, friendly, and generous, and morality, defined here as a set of principles of conduct or a system of values that distinguish between right and wrong.
Multiple studies have shown that kindness is universally preferred and sought after in relationships, both romantic and platonic, receiving “the highest mean rating across contexts (M = 6.8)” in one study on the preferences of individuals for various traits in romantic partners versus friends
(Sprecher, S., & Regan, P. C. 2002), and showing that acts of kindness increase peer acceptance in another (Layous, K., Nelson, S. K., Oberle, E., Schonert-Reichl, K. A., & Lyubomirsky, S. 2012).
Other studies have shown that morality consistently outranks sociability and competence in impression formation of other individuals and groups (Brambilla, M., & Leach, C. W. 2014), (Brambilla, M., & Sacchi, S. 2021).
A study on important traits in forming impressions by Brambilla, M., Sacchi, S., Rusconi, P., & Goodwin, G. P. (2019), resulted in morality holding “...the highest weight in forming impressions (β = .72), significantly outweighing sociability (β = .41) and competence (β = .33)”, and revealed that "Participants rated morality traits like 'trustworthy' as 85% more critical for first impressions than sociability traits like 'friendly”.
Furthermore, perceived immorality was “...a strong predictor of threat perception (r = 0.79).
", and "Information about morality was processed faster than sociability or competence (average RT = 650ms vs. 950ms)" (Brambilla, M., Sacchi, S., Rusconi, P., & Goodwin, G. P. 2019).
This supports the idea that morality may hold a deep-rooted evolutionary importance to establishing relationships, and that one of the most important factors in making new friends and integrating into social groups may be to simply be a good person.
Compassion, forgiveness, and gratitude are also important factors in being a “good person”.
However, compassion towards others, and general life success, cannot be obtained without first being compassionate to yourself.
Higher self-compassion correlates with 35% lower burnout and compassion fatigue in student midwives, while self judgement increased burnout by 27% and compassion fatigue by 22%, and self-kindness improved professional quality of life scores by 40% (Beaumont, E., Durkin, M., Hollins Martin, C. J., & Carson, J.
Many studies have shown the link between life-satisfaction and gratitude (Chauhan, A. S., Mathur, G., Gulati, C., & Sharma, A.
2024), (Toussaint, L., & Friedman, P. 2009), (Emmons, R. A., & McCullough, M. E. 2003), (Hermaen, H., & Bhutto, Z. H. 2020), emphasizing that being grateful for what you already have leads to higher levels of positive affect, life satisfaction, flourishing, and even reductions in negative physical symptoms.
Once this compassion is exercised on oneself, it can be focused outwards on others.
This is a foundational aspect of socialization.
A study by Toda, R., Toda, N., Hagihara, H., & Kanakogi, Y.
(2024) revealed that children as young as 4 years associate forgiveness with relational restoration, and by age 6 understand that forgiveness brings emotional benefits to the victim.
It also revealed that as children got older, they forgave more, and understood by age 6 that unforgiveness was linked to negative emotions (Toda, R., Toda, N., Hagihara, H., & Kanakogi, Y.
Other studies have shown the link between empathy and positive peer relationships (Haslip, M. J., Allen-Handy, A., & Donaldson, L. 2019), while maintaining that forgiveness does not always lead to reconciliation.
This emphasizes the important role of forgiveness in positive social outcomes.
From a more economic point of view, a study by Dreber, A., Rand, D. G., Fudenberg, D., & Nowak, M. A.
(2008) discovered that costly punishment reduced group payoffs (25% lower average payoffs) despite encouraging cooperation, and that high payoff individuals used punishment less than 5% of the time.
Cooperation was also shown to thrive in repeated interactions without need for punitive strategies (75% higher cooperation rates and 20% higher overall efficiency in games w/o punishment), revealing that forgiveness may be the more efficient and successful strategy in the long term (Punishment increased short-term cooperation by 30% but reduced long-term payoffs by 15%) (Dreber, A., Rand, D. G., Fudenberg, D., & Nowak, M. A.
Scaling up once again to the scale of businesses, there is significant economic, and social benefit to being ethical, generous, and investing in the well-being of your employees.
A positive corporate reputation contributes to sustained profitability, with a 2002 study finding that "Firms with above-average reputation scores achieved 24% higher profitability than peers over 15 years (1984-1998)...", with residual reputation (reputation not explained by financials) accounting for “32% of the variance in sustained profitability beyond financial performance predictors.” (Roberts, P. W., & Dowling, G. R. 2002).
In the same study, reputation building activities generated long term trust in the corporations, and demonstrated that being perceived as a good corporate actor fosters financial and reputational success.
Companies with the highest Corporate Social Responsibility ratings also experience significantly less volatility (up to 50% less) during crises and see higher cumulative abnormal returns (Yi, Y., Zhang, Z., & Yan, Y.
2021), (Lins, K. V., Servaes, H., & Tamayo, A.
2017), (Qiao, T., Han, L., & Liu, Y.
2021), with CSR serving as a sort of insurance policy against crisis.
The impact of these firms’ CSR was strongest in the regions with low market development, meaning this corporate kindness is most effective where it is needed the most!
And if that wasn’t enough, CSR has also been shown to decrease corporate misconduct in firms by 17%, and reduce ethical violations in firms by 28% (He, F., Huang, X., Liu, G., & Wang, Z.
This is incredibly important for firms’ performance as well as reputation, as witnessing unethical behavior by peers can trigger anger and reduce cooperative performance (Ma, J., Wang, X., & Deng, X.
2024), (Zeng, K., Wang, D., Ye, Q., Li, Z., & Zheng, X.
2021), (Maisonneuve, F., Groulx, P., Chênevert, D., & Grady, C. 2024).
Even mass layoffs can decrease the performance of a firm’s employees, with “Psychological contract breach” explaining 55% of the decline in organizational citizenship behavior and a 30% decrease in job performance for employees of these companies that implemented layoffs (López Bohle, S., Bal, P. M., Jansen, P. G. W., Leiva, P. I., & Alonso, A. M. 2017).
Game theory has shown that even in a selfish, uncertain environment, there is still an optimal level of generosity necessary to achieve the optimal outcome (Molander, P. 1985).
A bias towards generosity of as little as 10% led to “43% fewer instances of breakdown in cooperation during noisy interactions."
Additionally, "Generous strategies outperformed purely retaliatory strategies by 32% in overall payoffs” in the same game.
In a game as noisy and uncertain as life, it pays off to be unconditionally generous.
It’s good to be generous, but it’s also extremely bad to betray.
A study by Leonidou, L. C., Aykol, B., Fotiadis, T. A., & Christodoulides, P. (2017) showed that relational performance dropped 28% after a betrayal, and reduced trust between firms.
This trust is necessary for successful business relationships.
Many of my arguments so far have posited that being a good person simply leads to one being happier, having better mental health, or feeling good about themselves.
This does not directly reflect improved performance.
A meta-analysis by Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E. (2005) reviewed evidence that suggests happiness correlated with success outcomes across domains (r = 0.30) (p < 0.01), participants made to feel happy were more creative than when they were not happy, positive affect reduced health complaints by 25% and even improved immune system markers, and sociability was enhanced in individuals who were often in positive moods.
This suggests that happiness is a critical driver of long term success, and challenges the assumption that happiness comes from success.
Furthermore, anything that can uplift mood will inevitably decrease the negative impacts of depression, anxiety, and stress, which have been shown to be key indicators of academic underachievement and poor academic adaptation (Andrews, B., & Wilding, J. M. 2010).
Sadness has also been shown to decrease accuracy of social judgements, although a neutral mood outperformed both negative and positive moods on judgement scores (Ambady, N., & Gray, H. M. 2002).
While it has been argued that depressed individuals can make more accurate judgements of contingency (Alloy, L. B., & Abramson, L. Y.
1979), the performance benefits of a positive affect far outweigh the costs, and suggest that being a good person can indirectly improve performance through improving mood and mental health.
Another key argument that my framework has relied on so far has been that being a good person makes you more likeable, and improves your social performance.
This is not only important from a social success standpoint, but also for performance and success in other areas of life.
Older adults with quality friendships are less likely to be depressed, and weekly interactions with close friends increased their life satisfaction by 25% (Baldassare, M., Rosenfield, S., & Rook, K. S. 1984).
Furthermore, loneliness was correlated with a higher risk of reporting poor physical health (Baldassare, M., Rosenfield, S., & Rook, K. S. 1984).
Having good friendships also leads to improved academic performance.
Children with more friends at school are absent less, liked school more, and reported less teacher-reported disruptive behavior, while peer rejection led to declines in school performance and anxiety (Ladd, G. W. 1990).
Positive friendships can reduce allostatic load, and high quality friendships promote HPA regulation after stress (Calhoun, C. D., Helms, S. W., Heilbron, N., Rudolph, K. D., Hastings, P. D., & Prinstein, M. J.
The presence of friends and ability to integrate socially to form study groups leads to studying collaboration, improving academic performance, and trump socioeconomic background and individual ability in importance to academic and personal success (Stadtfeld, C., Vörös, A., Elmer, T., Boda, Z., & Raabe, I. J.
Specific friendship ties even correlated to GPA.
Too much social interaction, however, can easily become a distraction, which can negatively impact GPA (Alotaibi, T. A., et al.
Care should be taken to ensure that the quality of friendships are high.
Loneliness, often associated with a lack of friendships, predicts poorer health outcomes, on a comparable scale to the risks of smoking or obesity!
(Ernst, J. M., & Cacioppo, J. T. 1999) A study on the psychological impacts of loneliness (Ernst, J. M., & Cacioppo, J. T. 1999) revealed that it increases the risk of depression by 48%.
High loneliness participants were also 30% more likely to develop heart disease, and significantly less happy (Ernst, J. M., & Cacioppo, J. T. 1999).
Throughout this paper, I have shown that being a “good person” through being generous, kind, forgiving, grateful, and moral either directly improves performance in various aspects of life, or improves affect/mental health or likeability/social success, which in turn improve performance in academic, social, physical, economic, emotional, and personal aspects of life.
While some aspects of being a good person may have a high cost in the short term, the long term benefits of being good pay dividends through the establishment of a positive reputation, strong relationships, a solid support network, and satisfaction with life.
It takes a large degree of self control to do the right thing every day, but whether you’re doing it for yourself or for others, it's the right thing to do.
