You will most likely encounter alcohol at some point during your time in high school, and it's important to understand the facts about alcohol and how it will affect you in order to determine if and how you consume it. 
Alcohol is categorized as a CNS (central nervous system) depressant, and also a sedative hypnotic. A CNS depressant is any drug that lowers neurotransmission levels in the brain, which has the effect of reducing stimulation, leading to relaxation or anxiety-reducing effects. Sedative Hypnotics are just a subtype of CNS depressants that specifically decrease wakefulness. However, alcohol is slightly more complicated in this regard due to its biphasic effect. Alcohol typically has  a stimulating effect at first, followed by a depressing effect at higher doses (Pohorecky, 1977). Therefore it’s particularly important that you manage your consumption effectively, both to avoid the negative side effects of alcohol and also maximize its benefits. 
This biphasic effect is due to the multiple mechanisms of action of alcohol. Alcohol's primary MOA is on the GABA neurotransmitter, where it is a non-competitive, non selective GABA agonist. Because GABA is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, an agonist (alcohol) binding on it will amplify the inhibitive action of GABA, leading to a depressive effect. Alcohol is also a non-competitive, selective glutamate antagonist at NMDA receptors. Glutamate is an excitatory NT that affects learning, synaptic plasticity, sensory, motor, and cognitive function. Alcohol decreases Glutamate's effect at NMDA receptors, leading to sedation, disrupting memory and long term potentiation. This accounts for alcohol’s effect of “blacking out” or gaps in memory, as well as learning deficits seen after consuming alcohol. Alcohol also increases endogenous opioid synthesis and release (opioid agonist), in the form of endorphins, which contributes to some of Alcohol’s mild euphoric effects at low doses and pain relief at higher doses.This could be a factor that contributes to addictive potential and excessive consumption in individual drinkers, as studies have shown that individuals in which a single drink releases a larger amount of opioids in the brain get more pleasure out of each drink (Mitchell 2012). Finally, Alcohol has a secondary MOA, increasing dopamine in the Ventral Striatum through disinhibition, a characteristic shared by all drugs of abuse with addictive potential (Ferrarelli, 2016). This leads to mild euphoria and feelings of reward at low doses, and over time can lead to addiction. 
The acute and long-term effects of alcohol can be summarized as follows: At lower doses, you may feel less anxiety, stress, and inhibition. This is why alcohol is often referred to as a social lubricant. It can increase talkativeness, sociability, make you less judgemental, and give you a sense of mild euphoria. However, as you drink more, alcohol's effect on GABA and Glutamate overpower the secondary MOAs that create favorable effects at lower doses. You start losing motor coordination, balance, your judgment becomes impaired, your reaction times may slow down, you can become confused, and often sad with increasing doses. At very high doses, the effects become even more detrimental, leading to blackouts (loss of memory due to antagonism of Glutamate), nausea, vomiting, coma, and even death. On top of how much you consume, how you consume alcohol also matters. The most common route is oral, through drinking alcohol. This method leads to less complete absorption, as the alcohol must pass through the stomach and small intestine, where enzymes such as alcohol dehydrogenase begin breaking down the Alcohol. The longer Alcohol sits in the stomach, the less alcohol is absorbed into the bloodstream, and the slower and less intense its effects on your body will be. This is why eating food or drinking milk before consuming alcohol slows down intoxication. Concentration of alcohol also matters, as alcohol enters the bloodstream and is absorbed down the concentration gradient. The higher the concentration of alcohol ingested, the greater the concentration gradient, and the quicker alcohol moves across the membrane. Therefore, if you take 2 shots of vodka, you will feel its effects much more quickly than shotgunning a beer. Alcohol plasma levels typically peak at 30-120 minutes.  Other routes, such as "butt chugging", involve absorbing alcohol directly through membranes, which makes absorption faster and more complete, making it significantly more dangerous. 
Consistent alcohol consumption has some very negative long term effects as well. MOAs listed above lead to permanent changes in the brain, such as the upregulation of Glutamate NMDA receptors, downregulation of GABAa receptors, decreased DA firing and release, and reduced synthesis of endogenous opioids in the body. These all can lead to increased anxiety and excitability when not drinking, difficulty sleeping, increased pain sensitivity, reduced sensitivity to other rewards, and dysphoria. Other long term effects on the body include permanent brain damage from cell atrophy and decreased neurogenesis, which harms neuroplasticity and the ability to learn (Skarke 2012), memory loss, liver damage, and GI disruptions. Furthermore, persistent adolescent alcohol consumption can stunt development and lead to changes in cognition, mood, and behavior, hindering learning and processing of emotion-related stimuli (Teague and Nestler, 2022). If you develop a physical dependence, quitting can lead to alcohol withdrawal, which is the most deadly form of withdrawal. 
There is also a risk of mixing alcohol with other drugs. Alcohol is metabolized by the enzyme CYP-2E1 in the liver, which also metabolizes acetaminophen. Consuming painkillers with acetaminophen and drinking alcohol simultaneously can lead to very dangerous effects, as alcohol will not be metabolized as quickly in the body as quickly and the liver can be overwhelmed. Consuming nicotine leads to cross tolerance with alcohol, leading to decreased effects of both drugs at the same doses and a need for increased quantities to maintain the desired effects. 
Alcohol is similar to drugs like benzodiazepines, which are also CNS depressants that act by facilitating binding of GABA NTs to GABA receptors in order to increase IPSPs and depress neurotransmission and brain function. Benzodiazepines are often used as anti-anxiety medications with sedative-like effects. One key nuance is that benzos act as agonists on GABA by hyperpolarization through opening the ion-gated channels more often, while alcohol achieves hyperpolarization and therefore IPSP through keeping the channels open for longer. 
There are also certain myths around alcohol that I want to clear up for you. Alcohol actually leads to decreased enjoyment from sex and decreased sexual performance, contrary to popular belief. Alcohol doesn’t actually keep you warm (it dilates blood vessels, leading to more blood circulation around skin and more lost heat), and you certainly are less capable of driving than you may think you are, even after only a few drinks. This is because alcohol affects cognition, with one study showing that it inhibits specifically your ability to detect errors in your decision making or instigate performance adjustments to compensate for errors (Ridderinkhof, 2002). This could account for the false sense of confidence, lack of inhibition, and impulsivity that accompanies alcohol consumption, and makes driving all the more dangerous, because you are unable to tell when you are incapacitated and may feel able to drive when that isn’t the case. 
Alcohol isn’t the big bad scary drug that many adults make it out to be. It can augment a good time with friends and be quite fun; however, you should be really aware of when and how you consume it, because it can be incredibly dangerous when taken irresponsibly. Know your limits and prepare properly so that alcohol stays only a fun addition to your night out, and doesn’t become the reason your evening ends. And never become dependent on alcohol to have a good time: drugs don’t change who you are, they only alter things that are already happening inside of you. If you can’t have a good time without Alcohol, you certainly won’t be having a good time with it. 


Before the Dutch first landed at the Cape in 1652, complex interactions between indigenous populations and their societies in the region of Southern Africa were dictated by limited resources. Indigenous Kgosi's authority came from their ability to call on the ancestors and bring rain (Pula) . Cattle were sacred, often being referred to as "modimo o nko e metsi", or "God with the wet nose". Power and control were inextricably linked to economic prosperity. At the same time, European superpowers expanded and grew in wealth and power through the expansion of their extensive trade routes. The collision of these two societies would come to mark the first of many fundamental shifts in the structure of life in the region. The economic development of South Africa, and more specifically the control of labor, was a defining factor in its history.  This paper will explore five centers that help tell the story of how labor shaped the history of South Africa: (1) the commodification of labor power at the slave lodges in the early stages of the Cape Colony (1680), (2) the institutionalization of labor controls with the discovery of Diamonds in Kimberly (1871) and later gold in the Witwatersrand (1886), (3) the creation of a new labor force, with exploitive relations similar to those in earlier rural areas, to match industrialization in the Glen Grey district and through the Glen Grey Act (1894), (4) resistance and the awakening of the labor force in Durban through the labor strikes (1973), and (5) mass unemployment, changing socioeconomic circumstances, and the AIDS pandemic in Mandeni (1990).
The first major shift South Africa faced came with the arrival of the Dutch and the emergence of coerced labor as a vital aspect of the developing Cape Colony's economy. The Slave Lodge in the early Cape Colony was a central hub of slavery, and also one of the first places where the different populations of South Africa came together and interacted. As the colony grew from a simple outpost to a more permanent settlement, Dutch settlers had to find places to produce agriculture and find labor to work this land in order to survive (lecture 3). This led to the import of slaves from other European colonies in India, Angola, West Africa and Southeast Asia (lecture 4). Thus, a wide variety of cultures was represented inside of the slave lodge, a spawning ground for creole language (Afrikaans was born here), music and culinary traditions (Cape Malay), and interracial relationships. Demographics began to rapidly shift with the import of slaves, who soon outnumbered whites almost 5:1. A steady supply of slaves became essential for the expansion of colonized South Africa's export economy (Harries). 
Trekboers also often enslaved Khoisan to work on their farms, and came to rely on them for their own prosperity as well. When the British took over the Cape Colony permanently in 1806, ended the slave trade, and eventually emancipated the slaves, Trekboers were frustrated. Although Trekboers stated many other reasons on top of emancipation as their reason for leaving the Cape Colony and striking out on their own, there is general consensus that the loss of their slaves was one of the primary reasons for the mass migration of Trekboers away from the cape colony and into the SA interior, also known as the Great Trek (Retief, 1838). 
Slave labor in the early periods of colonization in SA became a necessary part of society, and supplying this labor and managing it as a minority led to the beginnings of many of the systems that would come to define South African history and permanently change the demographics of the country. 
“Slavery was a key institution in the Cape Colony under its rule by the Dutch East India
Company (VOC) between 1652 and 1795 and under both Dutch and British
administrations between 1795 and final slave emancipation in 1834. Slaves were the
mainstay of the labor force, especially in Cape Town and its rural hinterland, and for most of the VOC period slaves outnumbered free settlers. Slavery thus had a profound impact on the demographic, economic and social characteristics of the early colony.” (Worden, 2017, Pg. 1)
As white society expanded in SA, agriculture became more commercialized, and industry began to emerge. The Glenn Grey district in the Eastern Cape in the mid to late 1890's represented a shift from coerced labor and subsistence agriculture to a commercialized and industrialized economy, and the creation of a labor force to fuel this. The Glenn Grey district was located in the Queenstown and Wodehouse divisions of the Cape Colony. It contained valleys that were favorable for agriculture and grazing livestock. Colonists wanted this land, but it was occupied by Africans (mostly Thembu) and they were unable to take all of it. White farmers complained of overpopulation on African land and a lack of a labor supply for white-owned farms. The Cape government had been grappling with the issue of African land ownership for a while, and the Glenn Grey Act (or Native Land Act) first implemented in the Glenn Grey district was their solution. This act assigned individual land ownership of an assigned plot to the head of each household (about 4 morgens or 8.2 acres each), and sold off the rest of the land to white farmers. Africans were not allowed to sublet or squat on another's land, and a tax was levied on all landowners and men deemed able to work. This had the effect of providing more land to white farmers and further forcing Africans off of their land, but more importantly created a labor force that could be leveraged by the white population. This tax had to be paid in Rand, so either landowners sold their crops and livestock in exchange for Rand to pay this yearly tax, or they were forced to go work for European colonists in order to get the necessary currency. Furthermore, the tax was waived for any African male who worked outside of the district for at least 3 months. The act overall limited the number of African people who could live on or own land, and forced those who didn't qualify to own land to leave the district and look for employment elsewhere - typically in white-owned industry. Glenn Grey also helped deal with the problem of competition with the poor white, often Afrikaner, farmers, who were being outperformed by black farmers. The act helped funnel labor into white-owned farms, and reduce black ownership and share in the agriculture industry in South Africa.  The Glenn Grey district was the starting point for much of the structural violence against non-whites, as their land and ability to survive independently was taken away, and they were forced to migrate to find work. This was the foundation of the migrant labor system that oppressed Africans with pass laws and reservations that were unable to sustain their populations.
The discovery of Diamonds at Kimberly in 1871 marked the beginning of a period of rapid industrialization and globalization in South Africa, shifting the economy away from agriculture for good towards mining and global exports. “During this transition to a modern industrial state, most black South Africans were systematically denied access to alternative means of earning an independent livelihood, until the point was reached where they had only their labour to sell, and so came to form the largest part of the working class in the new society.” (Van Onselen) The diamond mine at Kimberly is described by the English writer, Andrew Trollope, in his account of his trip to South Africa in 1877. He paints a vivid picture of the scale of the mining operation as well as the use of African labor to effectuate the retrieval of the diamonds from the huge hole. Theft of the diamonds by the African workers became a significant problem and eventually led to the creation of closed compounds and strict controls over the labor force. Where religion and philanthropy were really slow at civilizing the African, money acted extremely quickly. Part of the problem came, however, in the sheer number of laborers required to make the mines profitable. In the 1870’s sometimes as few as four skilled white technicians and mechanics supervised up to ten thousand Africans. By 1911 these numbers had grown to over a quarter of a million and over half a million by 1960 (Feinstein, 2005). This was made possible by the creation of a single recruiting mechanism called the Native Recruiting Corporation for recruiting labor inside South Africa and the Witwatersrand Labour Association for recruiting in foreign countries (Feinstein, 2005). Control of these large labor groups became both a necessity and a significant problem. The closed compounds and strict controls required enforcement that was often executed by sheer brute force through the use of violence. The police and national armed forces became the mechanism for this enforcement. Although pass laws had existed in the mining industry since 1895, they became entrenched in the Labour Regulation Act of 1911. This law made it illegal for African mine workers to strike or move freely about the country. The complete control the mining companies had over the labor force meant that they were not held responsible for the high rate of disease, specifically silicosis, in the migrant laborers. This had a huge impact on the economy and family life in the long term. What they did not realize was the enormous burden they were creating on the economy by suppressing both education and skill development, and wages for these workers. Wealth was being concentrated in a small minority who maintained strict control of the labor market. This led eventually to the creation of Apartheid laws in 1948 in order to better control this vast majority of unskilled laborers. Another push factor that forced the African laborer to seek employment in the mines at low wages, was the steady deterioration of the reserves. Named differently at different times in history, these parcels of land became less productive as populations increased, forcing many men to migrate to the urban centers to find work. This was made possible by the temporary nature of the contracts the mines offered, often only twelve to eighteen months after which the men would return to their families on the reserves. It is noteworthy that the only reason the mining industry survived and was profitable was due to the extremely low wages they paid their unskilled African workers (Feinstein, 2005). 
The Coronation Brick and Tile Factory on the outskirts of Durban in 1973 was the site of some of the first labor strikes that marked an awakening of the non-white labor force in South Africa and an end to the dark economic prosperity of Apartheid South Africa. First, it is important to step back and understand that post second world war, the economy was forced to turn to manufacturing for sustainability. Prior to the war, the economy was firmly rooted in white agriculture and mining, but that was not sustainable. This reliance on manufacturing made the strike of 2,000 workers at a football field outside of the Coronation factory all that more important. Until this point, not many African workers were willing to stand up to the unfair labor practices and low wages of the white dominated economy. It seemed that the oppression of the Apartheid system was working. The strikes outside Durban were the first indications of the change coming. In the six years prior to the strike only 23,000 workers had struck. By March of 1973, 61,000 had participated in work walkouts (Friedman, 2005). Growth rates for real GDP per capita declined for most countries between 1973 and 1994 and fell to just 2% on average. The South African growth rate for the same period was a dismal -0.6% per year (Feinstein, 2005). Foreign investors were scared away by the poor economic performance and private residents began to steadily withdraw their money to foreign bank accounts. Policy makers and revisionist theorists “clearly failed to recognize the extent to which the needs of manufacturing diverged from those of mining and farming, and ignored the difficulty of achieving high productivity in industry on the basis of a migrant labor force.” (Feinstein, 2005, pg 247) Another problem soon arose as industry continued to expand. There was a shortage of skilled workers. All the rules that limited African participation in the skilled labor market worked when there was not a skilled worker shortage but did not when there was. The government started turning a blind eye to situations where companies ignored the rules and hired Africans to fill skilled labor positions. 
This pressure on the economy was tied to a sharp increase in the political fight against Apartheid. The combination of these factors was too much for the government to manage, eventually forcing them to concede to releasing Nelson Mandela from Robben Island in 1990 and leading to the ultimate demise of Apartheid South Africa with the first democratic election in 1994 and the birth of the new South Africa.  
What started as a miraculous transformation under the leadership of the new president, punctuated by events like the rugby world cup in 1995 where Nelson Mandela appeared at the final match in a Springbok jersey with the new South African flag and sang the new combined national anthem, to the peace and reconciliation commission lead by Bishop Desmud Tutu, soon degenerated amidst corruption when Mandela stepped down and the ANC was allowed to express its radical views. 
Mandeni, KwaZulu Natal after 1990 was a particularly potent example of post Apartheid life in democratic South Africa, and how individuals, particularly black South Africans, dealt with the effects of mass unemployment and extreme inequality. As Mark Hunter points out in the Social Science and Medicine Journal (2007), HIV rates jumped from 1% in 1990 to 29% in 2005 driven by rising unemployment, low marital rates, and increased migration of women. These three reasons can all be traced back to the way the labor market was forced to react to the economic and political pressure described above. The negative GDP per capita growth referenced above caused unemployment rates to skyrocket. The first affected were black men. As the government reacted by increasing wage competition, certain sectors such as the clothing industry were hit hard and unemployment climbed to 40%. Women quickly followed and by the turn of the century things were desperate, leaving many women with no option but for money/sex exchanges further fueling the HIV crisis. Marriage rates have declined significantly from above 50% in the mid 1930’s to below 30% in the early 2000’s (Hunter, 2007). Especially among the poor, wedlock is being seen as an inflexible institution. There also appears to be an increase in the migration of women, specifically the circular migration between rural and urban settings in search of work. The results were massive increases in HIV rates giving rise to increased medical care costs in an already faltering economy. 
In conclusion, the economic development of South Africa, and more specifically the control of labor, was a defining factor in its history. This journey through these five sites has hopefully provided some insight into the manner in which white English and Afrikaans people interacted with black Africans in the labor market from farms to mines to factories. From the slave trade of the early settlers, to diamond and gold mining , industrialization, strikes, and mass unemployment, this journey continues today with the world’s highest unemployment rate of 34.4% compared to 3.4% in the United States. With crumbling infrastructure, a broken education system, and little hope for the future, South Africa lies at a crossroads. Where will the story end?

The idea of racial capitalism is that the advancement of a capitalist society and the accumulation of capital are innately racially biased, and in practice widen the inequality gap between privileged and underprivileged members of the population. This can be seen manifested throughout history, as everything from drug laws to traffic fines utilized racial bias and corrupt justifications to commodify a disenfranchised portion of their populations to maximize profit at the dominated group's expense. The system of capitalism itself only serves to further embed these inequities and disparities by giving immense power to the capitalist and feeding a vicious cycle that makes it nearly impossible to escape or achieve autonomy as a member of a disenfranchised group. The role of psychology throughout history has largely been to justify many of these inequities and human right violations by providing often corrupt reasoning and science to propagate racist ideologies and systems. Thus psychology has largely served the interests of those in power, and tried (with good or bad intentions) to force those without power to fit into these systems. "History from Below" and Liberation Psychology aim to reverse this narrative, focusing instead on the needs of the oppressed and powerless in society, through the revision of historical accounts from the perspective of the common person rather than the elite, and the realignment of psychology towards the collective good. Furthermore, psychology has taken on a focus in understanding this inequality, which may allow for action in the future to mitigate it and use psychology for good. 
Racial Capitalism is fundamentally intertwined into almost every aspect of everyday life. The capitalization of the prison system, for example, has taken advantage of an oppressed population for profit and has had a disproportionately negative effect on the African American population. A loophole to the thirteenth amendment allows for involuntary and unpaid labor as punishment for crimes, which prisons and businesses have been using for decades to gain access to cheap labor at the expense of prisoners (lecture 11/13TH). This stemmed from the abolition of slavery and the sudden loss of a major labor supply in the southern economy, leading the south to scramble to find a new way to fulfill their massive demand. African Americans, many of whom were just freed, were arrested en masse and imprisoned, where they once again were caught in slavery, this time simply under a different name. This was followed by the Nixon era of "Law and Order" in the United States, and Reagan's "war on drugs'', all of which disproportionately affected African Americans. The lack of logic and science behind the much harsher sentencing for crack cocaine (which was used by more African Americans) compared to powder cocaine (mostly used by the wealthy) is just one example of how the state upheld and even instigated a racialized capitalism and encoded it into law (13TH/lecture 11). Another example of this is the capitalization of the police force and law, a prime example being the municipality system in St. Louis, MO. This system issued massive fines in poor communities for incredibly minor offenses (such as jaywalking), and allowed for you to get fines from multiple different municipalities for the same offense, maximizing profit and effectively crippling the poor population, many of whom cannot afford to pay such inordinate fines and are then further penalized in a vicious cycle (lecture 12/Ferguson: A Report from Occupied Territory). This is another example of how the state reinforces unfair and unequal practices and systems that widen inequality and make it even more difficult for the oppressed to escape the system. Further examples include the inequality of healthcare and insurance, with differing access and costs, who's believed when they say they're in pain, and who's taken seriously by doctors, and housing inequality (restrictive covenants and racist zoning laws) (lecture 17). These examples all reveal the sinister and often subtle manifestation of racial capitalism in the lived realities of individuals, and how the state often reinforces these systems and upholds inequality through their policies and actions. 
While psychology and History have often favored the side of the oppressors and those in power, new movements have focused on reversing this narrative and empowering the common people and the oppressed. "History from Below" is a movement that focuses on looking at historical events and narratives from the perspective of the oppressed populations and taking emphasis off of the false idea that just a few powerful figures in history accounted for the majority of happenings (Rediker). It is almost never one singular brilliant person that comes up with a new philosophy or achieves some great act; instead, they were simply the culmination of many other people and ideas before them that are then represented by these singular figures of power in traditional historical narratives. History from Below attempts to emphasize the individual experience of common people, of the wage laborers, the common soldiers, and the anarchists, and show how they were oppressed and subdued by those in power. It takes away the biased and often false narrative set by those who benefitted from history and focuses instead on the truth of the general masses, those who had little power but bear the most weight of history and its aftermath (Rediker). This allows for the true extent of inequality to be seen and understood, and only when this happens can it be addressed. Liberation psychology attempts to do a similar thing, but instead of focusing on history it focuses on reversing psychology's historical role in upholding and justifying the systems of the oppressors, into a role of helping those in need and advancing the social conditions of the disenfranchised (martin baro). Liberation psychology attempts to understand the perspectives of the communities it serves and help individuals achieve freedom and autonomy. Instead of trying to pathologize and cure "problems'' within the individual in order to help them fit better into an unyielding system, it tries to figure out how the system can be manipulated in order to better serve the people within it (Martin Baro). This is an incredibly important shift in perspective that takes power and importance away from those in positions of privilege and validates the oppressed, which in the long run has the effect of exposing and minimizing social inequality in communities. 
With this shift in the focus of psychology comes many new methods that help us understand inequality. Jetten and Peters focus on subjective experience and more subtle forms of inequality, especially in education, to show how deeply entrenched social inequalities can have an adverse effect on students in universities and the education system, despite there being no obvious inequality in their education. This is because many of the aspects of our education system were created for a specific group, and even when other groups (here she focuses on lower income and minority students) get the same opportunities and education, it often doesn't serve them nearly as well as the education's intended recipient. Croizet and others emphasize the role of the education system in perpetuating social inequality, and how it shapes the way individuals think, act, and perceive the world such that there doesn't even need to be a conscious effort to subjugate others or submit to them; it just happens subconsciously (symbolic violence). Many of these institutions categorize their members and funnel them into specific jobs or career paths that then restrict the paths their lives can take. This categorization is a way of controlling individuals and providing the necessary skill and labor to perpetuate systems of inequality, as well as categorizing individuals so they become trapped in these specific roles (Croizet). Furthermore, they argue that the educational system and the idea of an egalitarian 'meritocracy', is not actually egalitarian or merit-based at all. Even if equal opportunity is provided to each student, it doesn't account for generational inequalities and disparities that place them at a disadvantage from the start. On top of this, equal opportunity isn't really even possible, because by setting up any form of standardized measure of merit, one has to create an ideal or norm that will inevitably suit one population best (croizet). Every other group trying to achieve this standard is working at a disadvantage because their language or culture or ideas are not valued the same. Finally, Augoustinos and Callaghan discuss the implications of language and the social inequality it perpetuates in everyday life. They discuss the role of language in justifying and legitimizing inequality and unequal practices through contradictory arguments and double-standards (Augoustinos and Callaghan). These new psychological approaches help to understand the role of inequality in society and how the systems and norms in everyday life perpetuate it. 
These studies serve to unveil some of the more subtle and sinister ways in which inequality is present in everyday life and is perpetuated by our systems, government, and education. Inequality often hides behind the guise of egalitarianism or meritocracy, and unveiling the contradictory function of many of these systems helps reveal what we can change in order to achieve a more egalitarian system and help those who have been oppressed get back on equal footing with those inequality has benefitted. By reversing the narrative and giving those without power a voice to reveal their condition and oppression, we can begin to undo the wrongs of the past and implement changes that will benefit everyone and society as a whole. 

